So so far we've focused on concepts that involve vectors some of the vectors that we've looked at so
far were the force vector given by cool Ohm's Law.
For example if I want to calculate the magnitude we've also looked at the electric field produced by
point charges maybe by sheets of charges or by wires.
And those were linked together by this simple formula.
Right.
Simply the charge multiplied by the electric field.
All right.
What I now want to do is I want to develop some problem solving approaches that involves scales and
scalar as will be related to the concept of energy.
So the basic property of those is they're just numbers right.
We don't have any direction so simple numbers no direction.
So in some ways it is a little bit easier to solve problems like that.
All right.
The first concept that I want to just kind of remind ourselves is something called work.
This is going to be important when we deal with problems solving haven't do it charges.
Let me start by just the simple definition of work.
It's called sorry it's defined as the force a scalar product with a displacement.
And I'll illustrate what that means.
Now this formula right here that I write is only true for constant forces so only true for constant
forces
when the force changes for example for new for cool arms law we saw that the force depends on the distance.
I wouldn't be able to use this equation to calculate the work done but if the force is constant like
a charge between parallel plates typically the force is constant so let's have a look at this in more
detail.
This is a scalar product
and the way that you can write down a scalar product again I would write simply that the work again
if the magnitude of the force I'll just call it force it's the magnitude of the displacement and it's
coercive the angle between both of those.
So if we take a couple of cases for example if I have a force F which is in this direction and I have
a displacement which is also in this direction.
In that case here the angle theta would be equal to zero because there's no angle between both of those
vectors.
So this here would represent a case where somebody might be pushing a crate along the floor.
So here's a crate resting on the floor and I apply a force to it in order to move it.
So in this case here I'm applying a force and I want to move it a certain distance.
Delta X again the displacement is also to the right in this case.
So that would represent this one.
There's another way I can move that crate.
What if I have a force that's actually pushing down a little bit.
Right.
Again imagine we have again a same crate.
I could push that crate and move it along the floor even if I apply a certain force at a distance like
this it might be a little bit harder.
However I'm still going to have a displacement and the displacement is still going to be this way.
I'm gonna move the crate along the floor.
So in this case if you draw those vectors end to end or starting at the same position here I'd have
my force like this.
So sorry forces at an angle.
Try that again I'd have a force in this direction and my displacement is in this direction.
That's my delta x.
In this case here I have an angle theta between them.
So if I wanted to calculate the work for this case I would say that the work is simply f delta x and
then I would have to include this coast of the angle theta.
So that's how that angle theta comes in.
You could see that in some cases for the special case where theta is 90 degrees.
There is no work being done by that force.
So let's kind of highlight that right when theta equals the 90 that's the force is perpendicular to
the displacement.
In that case the work equals to 0.
The units of work again it's a force times a distance.
This actually ends up being units of joules and these are units of energy.